first start for generations (#66)
the-teachingRSE-project/end_of_RSEng: future_challenges_for_RSEng.tex

Specialised clusters have formed, which pool the skills of certain specialised RSEs with certain RSE units specialising in certain tasks like data management, HPC, or visualisation.
At universities which create such RSE units, it can be observed that researchers naturally accept them as part of their available services.
Additionally, researchers will seamlessly interact with infrastructures for using research software.
Replacement of staff reaching retirement has led to the creation of more RSE professorships.
\end{whatis}
Academia, while claiming to be innovative~\cite{wzvgbayern},
has organisationally often adopted time scales for change that are more reminiscent
to institutions thinking on the time scale of societal generations.

> While sounding negative, this can also be an opportunity that should be used by the RSE community.

Reviewer: I agree - what about 
```suggestion
The RSE community should plan ahead and use opportunities on that horizon.
```

If in the time-frame of the next decade, a large number of permanent staff reach retirement and
can be replaced by a new generation of researchers and technical professionals who have seen the

> digital transformation first-hand and maybe have actively participated in it through various grassroots initiatives.

Reviewer: what about putting this partial sentence as a statement before the previous sentence in support of it, something like

> During the next decade many positions at universities and research institutions will open as the generation of the baby boomers come to retirement age. The RSE community should plan ahead and use this opportunity to fill some of these positions with RSEs and other RTPs.

We also hope that specialised clusters form, which pool the skills of certain specialised RSEs with certain RSE units specializing in certain tasks like data management, HPC, or visualisation.
At universities which get such RSE units, we want to see that researchers naturally accept them as part of their available services.
Additionally, researchers will seamlessly interact with infrastructures for using research software.

> Replacement of aging staff has led to the creation of more RSE professorships.

Reviewer 2: Not sure on the wording of this - perhaps say:
```suggestion
Replacement of staff reaching retirement has led to the creation of more RSE professorships.
```

\end{whatis}
Academia, while claiming to be innovative~\cite{wzvgbayern},
has organisationally often adopted time scales for change that are more reminiscent
to institutions thinking on the time scale of societal generations.
While sounding negative, this can also be an opportunity,

> if in the time-frame till 2035 a large number of aging, permanent staff is replaced by new people that have observed the
> digital transformation first-hand and have actively participated in it through various grassroots initiatives.\\
> On the other hand, the presence, even today, of initiatives like \emph{the Hidden Ref}~\cite{hiddenref}

Reviewer 2: Suggesting a rewording here - this is personal preference but I also think the "is" on L559 should be "are"?
```suggestion
if in the time-frame of the next decade, a large number of permanent staff reach retirement and are replaced by a new generation of researchers and technical professionals who have seen the
digital transformation first-hand and have actively participated in it through various grassroots initiatives.\\
On the other hand, the presence, even today, of initiatives like \emph{the Hidden Ref}~\cite{hiddenref}
```

Specialised clusters have formed, which pool the skills of specialised RSEs with RSE units specialising in certain tasks like data management, HPC, or visualisation.
At universities which create such RSE units, it can be observed that researchers naturally accept them as part of their available services.
Additionally, researchers interact seamlessly with infrastructures for using research software.
Replacement of staff reaching retirement, combined with the intensified research interest in RSE, has led to the creation of more RSE professorships.
\end{whatis}
Academia, while claiming to be innovative~\cite{wzvgbayern},
has organisationally often adopted time scales for change that are more reminiscent
to institutions thinking on the time scale of societal generations.

> During the next decade many positions at universities and research institutions will vacate as the generation of the baby boomers come to retirement age.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the next decade many positions at universities and research institutions will be vacated as the generation of the baby boomers come to retirement age.
```

A second, more progressive step would be to actually appoint new cross-faculty professorships.
Already today the presence, of initiatives like \emph{the Hidden Ref}~\cite{hiddenref} hints at a potential for specialisation of research tasks.
This gives rise to new job descriptions within the academic system such as specialised RSEs or other RTPs.
Some specialisation trends have already been observed in recent years,
such as the HPC-RSE and AI-RSE, which are quite recent developments,
and whose appeal is stimulated by large public and private investments in HPC facilities and AI technologies.
We foresee new RSE specialisations emerging, \eg, in the fields of quantum computing,
such as the Quantum-RSE, or in digital research infrastructure.
We note the SE community has also independently expressed interest in creating an \emph{infrastructure engineering} role~\cite{Sochat2024Infra}
and funding bodies seem willing to promote such career pathways~\cite{UKRI2025Infra,EuroHPC2024Federated}.
Taking these trends together the generational change should be used as an opportunity to reshape organisational structures to better reflect the work people in research

> are actually doing. The RSE community should take an active role in shaping that discussion in this direction till 2035.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are actually doing. The RSE community should take an active role in shaping this discussion.
```

I don't think we can stop in 2035
